Packet number encoding appendix (#4315)
quicwg/base-drafts: draft-ietf-quic-transport.md

sent.  A peer receiving the packet will then correctly decode the packet number,
unless the packet is delayed in transit such that it arrives after many
higher-numbered packets have been received.  An endpoint SHOULD use a large
enough packet number encoding to allow the packet number to be recovered even
if the packet arrives after packets that are sent afterwards.

As a result, the size of the packet number encoding is at least one bit more
than the base-2 logarithm of the number of contiguous unacknowledged packet

> numbers, including the new packet.

Reviewer: I think my preferences goes to retaining this sentence.

Having pseudo code makes sense, but IMO it is better to state the constraints that a function has to meet.

Author: It's not actually gone, it's a comment in the pseudo-code.  The paragraph above describes the constraints, while this describes the math which would satisfy those complaints.

Reviewer: I think my point is that it would be more helpful to the readers to have this paragraph here, than just having the super-abstract guidance stated in the paragraph above. I tend to think that the specification should be parsable without reading the pseudo-code.

That said, this is a discussion about where the practical guidance should be stated, and therefore my preference is not a strong at all.

--- back

# Sample Packet Number Encoding Algorithm {#sample-packet-number-encoding}

The pseudo-code in {{alg-encode-pn}} shows how an implementation can select
an appropriate size for packet number encodings.

The EncodePacketNumber function takes two arguments:

* full_pn is the full packet number of the packet being sent.

> * largest_acked is the largest packet number which has been acknowledged by the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* largest_acked is the largest packet number that has been acknowledged by the
```

Reviewer 2: Can you also modify the variable definitions in the Decode part to match these?

Author: There's already a PR for that, which I was emulating.

>   recipient in the current packet number space, if any

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  peer in the current packet number space, if any
```

~~~
EncodePacketNumber(full_pn, largest_acked):
  // If no packets in the current space have been
  // acknowledged, the full packet number is used.
  if largest_acked is None:

>     return full_pn

Reviewer 3: Whoops, missed this.  You can safely assign num_acked to `full_pn + 1` in this case.  Returning early is bad for the same reasons.

Reviewer 3: You can set min_bits to log2(full_pn) (without the +1) as well, I guess.

Reviewer 2: @martinthomson : I don't follow what setting num_acked to `full_pn + 1` gets you. Why is this early return not good enough?

Reviewer 3: The early return takes a number and returns it.  We are looking for an encoded value that includes a length (in bytes).  If full_pn is 10, returning that doesn't tell the caller how many bytes to write out.

Running this through the full encoding algorithm avoids that problem.

  // The number of bits must be at least one more
  // than the base-2 logarithm of the number of contiguous
  // unacknowledged packet numbers, including the new packet.
  num_unacked = full_pn - largest_acked
  min_bits = log(num_unacked, 2) + 1
  num_bytes = ceil(min_bits / 8)

>   return full_pn[-num_bytes:]

Reviewer 3: Someone has been doing too much python.

As the value is not encoded into bytes before you index it, this is hard to follow.

```suggestion
  let encoded = []
  for i in 0..num_bytes:
    encoded.unshift((full_pn >> (8 * i)) & 0xff)
    // encoded.unshift((full_pn / (256^i)) % 256) ?
  return encoded
```

Reviewer 2: Someone has been doing too much Javascript :-)
I don't think `.unshift` can be used without definition like this (I had to look it up).

This will be tricky to do without language conventions. I would recommend simply:
```
// return the value after truncating the full packet
// number to num_bytes least significant bytes
return truncate(full_pn, num_bytes)

Reviewer 3: So do it this way instead?

```
    encoded = [(either expression), encoded...]
```

Author: I like the solution of throwing it to an undefined function with a comment describing what it does.  The implementer can do that however their language best permits.

~~~
{: #alg-encode-pn title="Sample Packet Number Encoding Algorithm"}

For example, if an endpoint has received an acknowledgment for packet 0xabe8bc
and is sending a packet with a number of 0xac5c02, there are 29,519 (0x734f)
outstanding packets.  In order to represent at least twice this range (59,038

> packets, or 0xe69e), 16 bits will be required.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
packets, or 0xe69e), 16 bits are required.
```

--- back

# Sample Packet Number Encoding Algorithm {#sample-packet-number-encoding}

The pseudo-code in {{alg-encode-pn}} shows how an implementation can select
an appropriate size for packet number encodings.

The EncodePacketNumber function takes two arguments:

* full_pn is the full packet number of the packet being sent.
* largest_acked is the largest packet number which has been acknowledged by the

>   peer in the current packet number space, if any

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  peer in the current packet number space, if any.
```

~~~
EncodePacketNumber(full_pn, largest_acked):

  // The number of bits must be at least one more
  // than the base-2 logarithm of the number of contiguous
  // unacknowledged packet numbers, including the new packet.
  if largest_acked is None:
    num_unacked = full_pn + 1
  else:
    num_unacked = full_pn - largest_acked

  min_bits = log(num_unacked, 2) + 1
  num_bytes = ceil(min_bits / 8)

  // Return the value after truncating the full packet number

>   // to num_bytes least-significant bytes

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  // to num_bytes least-significant bytes.
```

>   // Return the value after truncating the full packet number
>   // to num_bytes least-significant bytes

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  // Encode the integer value and truncating to the 
  // num_bytes least-significant bytes.
```

>   return truncate(full_pn, num_bytes)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  return encode(full_pn, num_bytes)
```
